Brief History of Psychology
By Sumaira Ayub

• Seven thousand years ago, people assumed that
psychological problems were caused by evil spirits.
To allow those spirits to escape from a person’s body,
ancient healers chipped a hole in a patient’s skull with
crude instruments—a procedure called trephining.
• 7th-century philosopher Descartes, nerves were
hollow tubes through which “animal spirits”
conducted impulses in the same way that water is
transmitted through a pipe. When a person put a
finger too close to a fire, heat was transmitted to the
brain through the tubes.

What are the origins of psychology?
• John Locke believed that children were born into the
world with minds like “blank slates” (tabula rasa in
Latin) and that their experiences determined what
kind of adults they would become. Some argues about
inborn knowledge.
• Franz Josef Gall, an 18th-century physician, argued
that a trained observer could find out intelligence,
moral character, and other basic personality
characteristics from the shape and number of bumps
on a person’s skull.

Schools of Thought
• Wilhelm Wundt laid the foundation of psychology in
1879, when he opened his laboratory in Germany.
• Aim was to study the building blocks of the mindpsychology to be the study of conscious experience.
• His perspective, which came to be known as
structuralism, focused on uncovering the
fundamental mental components of perception,
consciousness, thinking, emotions, and other kinds of
mental states and activities.

• To determine how basic sensory processes shape our
understanding of the world, people are asked to
describe certain stimulus, in their own words and in
as much detail as they could, what they were
experiencing (Introspection). Wundt argued that by
analyzing people’s reports, psychologists could come
to a better understanding of the structure of the mind.
• It was not a scientific technique and people had
difficulty describing some kinds of inner experiences,
such as emotional responses.

• The perspective that replaced structuralism is known
as functionalism. Rather than focusing on the mind’s
structure, functionalism concentrated on what the
mind does and how behavior functions.
• Led by William James in 19th century, the
functionalists examined what role behavior plays in
allowing people to adapt to their environments.
• For example, a functionalist might examine the
function of the emotion of fear in preparing us to deal
with emergency situations.

Instead of considering the individual parts that make up
thinking, gestalt psychologists took the opposite tack,
studying how people consider individual elements
together as units or wholes. Gestalt psychology
emphasizes how perception is organized. it proposed
that “the whole is different from the sum of its parts,”
meaning that our perception, or understanding, of
objects is greater and more meaningful than the
individual elements that make up our perceptions.

Thank You

