Motivation: Why do we do the things we do?
∙ Dynamics of behavior that initiate, sustain,
direct, and terminate actions
∙ What makes us start, persist, focus on, and
stop what we do?

Motivation
The factors that direct and energize the behavior of
humans and other organisms. Motivation has biological,
cognitive, and social aspects, and the complexity of the
concept has led psychologists to develop a variety of
approaches.

Types of Motives
• Primary (or Biological) Motive: Innate (inborn)
motives based on biological needs we must meet to
survive
• Secondary (or Learned) Motive: Based on learned
needs, drives, and goals

A Model of Motivational Activities
• Model of how motivated activities work
• Need: Internal deficiency; causes
• Drive: Energized motivational state (e.g., hunger,
thirst); activates a…
• Response: Action or series of actions designed to
attain a…
• Goal: Target of motivated behavior
• Incentive Value: Goal’s appeal beyond its ability to
fill a need

Types of Motivation
• Intrinsic Motivation: Motivation coming from within,
not from external rewards; based on personal
enjoyment of a task
• Extrinsic Motivation: Based on obvious external
rewards, obligations, or similar factors (e.g., pay,
grades)

Activity
1. Where do you see yourself in 5 years?
2. WRITE YOUR 5 STRENGTHS AND 5
WEAKNESS.

Instinct Approaches: Born to Be Motivated
• Inborn patterns of behavior that are biologically
determined rather than learned.
• According to instinct approaches to motivation,
people and animals are born preprogrammed with
sets of behaviors essential to their survival. Those
instincts provide the energy that channels behavior in
appropriate directions.
• i.e. aggression

Drive-Reduction Approaches:
Satisfying Our Needs
• Theories suggesting that a lack of a basic biological
requirement such as water produces a drive to obtain
that requirement (in this case, the thirst drive).
• For example, we become hungry after not eating for a
few hours and may raid the refrigerator, especially if
the next scheduled meal is not imminent. If the
weather turns cold, we put on extra clothing or raise
the setting on the thermostat to keep warm. If our
bodies need liquids to function properly, we
experience thirst and seek out water.

• Many basic drives, such as hunger, thirst, sleep are
related to biological needs of the body or of the
species as a whole. These are called primary drives.
Primary drives contrast with secondary drives in
which behavior fulfills no obvious biological need.
• In secondary drives , prior experience and learning
bring about needs. For instance, some people have
strong needs to achieve academically and
professionally.

Incentive Approaches:
Motivation’s Pull
• Theories suggesting that motivation stems from the
desire to obtain valued external goals, or incentives.
• In this view, the desirable properties of external
stimuli—whether grades, money, affection, food, —
account for a person’s motivation

Cognitive Approaches: The
Thoughts Behind Motivation
• Cognitive approaches to motivation suggest that
motivation is a product of people’s thoughts,
expectations, and goals—their cognitions. For
instance, the degree to which people are motivated to
study for a test is based on their expectation of how
well studying will pay off in terms of a good grade.

Maslow’s Hierarchy: Ordering
Motivational Needs
• Maslow’s hierarchy suggests that there are five
basic needs: physiological, safety, love and
belongingness, esteem, and self-actualization.
Only after the more basic needs are fulfilled can a
person move toward meeting higher-order needs.

How are needs relating to achievement, affiliation,
and power motivation exhibited?
Need for achievement: Striving for Success
• A stable, learned characteristic in which a person
obtains satisfaction by striving for and attaining a
level of excellence.
• People with a high need for achievement seek out
situations in which they can compete against some
standard—such as grades, money, or winning a game
— and prove themselves successful.

The Need for Affiliation: Striving for Friendship
• An interest in establishing and maintaining
relationships with other people.
• People who have higher affiliation needs are
particularly sensitive to relationships with others.
They desire to be with their friends more of the time
and alone less often, compared with people who are
lower in the need for affiliation.

The Need for Power: Striving for Impact on Others
• A tendency to seek impact, control, or influence over
others and to be seen as a powerful individual.
• people with strong needs for power are more apt to
belong to organizations and seek office than are those
low in the need for power. They also tend to work in
professions in which their power needs may be
fulfilled, such as business management
