PERSPECTIVES IN PSYCHOLOGY
Sumaira Ayub

These broad perspectives emphasize different
aspects of behavior and mental processes, and
each takes our understanding of behavior in a
somewhat different direction.

Biological Perspective
This considers how people and non humans function
biologically: how individual nerve cells are joined
together, how the inheritance of certain characteristics
from parents and other ancestors influences behavior,
how the functioning of the body affects hopes and
fears, which behaviors are instinctive, and so forth.
This perspective includes the study of heredity and
evolution, which considers how heredity may
influence behavior, and behavioral neuroscience,
which examines how the brain and the nervous
system affect behavior.

• Further there are certain chemicals which are
involved in predicting certain behaviors.
• The chemicals are in forms of
Neurotransmitters and hormones.
• The emotional reactions are prediction of the
balance / imbalance of these chemicals.

Psychodynamic Perspective
• Behavior is motivated by inner forces and conflicts
about which we have little awareness or controlunderstanding inner person
• Dreams and slips of the tongue as indications of what
a person is truly feeling
• Sigmund Freud
• Helps not only to understand and treat some kinds of
psychological disorders but also to understand
everyday phenomena such as prejudice and
aggression.

Behavioral Perspective
• John B. Watson
• suggests that the focus should be on external behavior
that can be observed and measured objectively.
• “Give me a dozen healthy infants, well-formed, and
my own specified world to bring them up in and I’ll
guarantee to take any one at random and train him to
become any type of specialist I might select—doctor,
lawyer, artist, merchant chief, and yes, even beggarman and thief, regardless of his talents, penchants,
tendencies, abilities, vocations and race of his
ancestors” (Watson, 1924).

• Observing the outer person
• Along with its influence in the area of learning
processes, this perspective has made
contributions in such diverse areas as treating
mental disorders, curbing aggression,
resolving sexual problems, and ending drug
addiction

Cognitive Perspective
• Focuses on how people think, understand, and know
about the world.
• Its emphasis is on learning how people comprehend
and represent the outside world within themselves and
how our ways of thinking about the world influence
our behavior.
• how people understand and think about the world and
describes the patterns and irregularities in the
operation of our minds.
• Cognitive distortions

Humanistic Perspective
• Rejects the view that behavior is determined
largely by automatically unfolding biological
forces, unconscious processes, or the
environment.
• All individuals naturally strive to grow,
develop, and be in control of their lives and
behavior- to seek fulfillment
• Carl Rogers and Abraham Maslow

• free will- ability to freely make decisions about
one’s own behavior and life.
• people have the ability to make their own
choices about their behavior rather than
relying on societal standards.

Sociocultural Perspective
• It emphasizes the influence of society on
individual human behavior- effect of social
situations in terms of society as a whole and its
role in shaping human behavior
• the social norms and cultural aspect of society
influences the way we perceive other
individuals, situations, and our overall
personality.

Thank You ☺

