OCTAVE-S
Nosheen Manzoor

Small Organizations
• Most approaches for evaluating information security risks that we have
seen generally focus on the needs of large organizations
• A pragmatic approach designed for small organizations does not exist
today, and most small organizations cannot afford the cost of outsourcing
this function to external parties
• The intent is to provide those organizations with an efficient, inexpensive
approach to begin identifying and managing their information security
risks, enabling them to improve their security posture

Different Organizational Characteristics
• When the OCTAVE method was developed, different people from many
types of organizations were consulted in order to understand their
requirements as potential users of the method.
• But the developed approach most of the times does not suit smaller
organizations and becomes inconsistent with the way such companies
implement their business processes
• The requirements for implementing OCTAVE in small organizations are
driven by the following organizational characteristics
– Structure of Small organizations
– Lack of Competency
– Scarce Resources

..contd
• Structure of Small Organizations
– Small organizations typically have a flat, nonhierarchical organizational structure for
example, a 100-person company that has a single location might be able to assemble a
team of 5 people that has sufficient insight into the entire organization

• Lack of Competency
– Lack of core competency in information technology management, including secure
systems and network management. Small organizations often outsource management of
their computing infrastructures

• Scarce Resources
– Very small organizations are typically quite lean and have limited staff time available for
security improvement initiatives

• Although these characteristics are typical of small organizations, There are
organizations with fewer than 100 employees that are very hierarchical,
manage their computing infrastructures, and implement process
improvement efforts
• Likewise, we have seen instances of organizations with more than 100
employees that have a flat organizational structure, outsource
management of their computing infrastructures, and do not have staff
available for process improvement activities
• There is no absolute definition of a small organization. The approach being
used here addresses the "typical" small organization that is nonhierarchical,
outsources management of its computing infrastructures, and has very
limited staff time to conduct OCTAVE

Structure
•

Think of information security as trying to solve a puzzle. In large, hierarchical
organizations, people can become very specialized in their job duties. Their
understanding of the big picture related to the organization's business processes often
becomes very narrow. Thus, each person in such an organization holds one piece of
the information security puzzle.

•

By contrast, in small, nonhierarchical organizations people often acquire a range of
skills and perform a variety of tasks. Each person in such an organization has greater
insight into business processes and holds many pieces of the information security
puzzle

•

In hierarchical organizations the evaluation process requires a series of knowledge
elicitation workshops to build the big picture of security in the organization, with each
person contributing his or her piece of the puzzle. In nonhierarchical organizations,
only one workshop may be needed to build the global view of security, because
analysis team members bring most of the puzzle with them.

Outsourcing
•

Consider an organization whose management decides to build a core
competency in information technology management. Managers will likely hire
people with information technology backgrounds and provide educational
opportunities for them to keep their skills up to date with current technology
trends. People within the organization have the knowledge and skills to lead
the technological aspects of an information security risk evaluation.

•

Now consider an organization whose management decides to outsource
information technology management. Contractors or managed service
providers maintain the organization's systems and networks. In essence the
organization has transferred responsibility for managing its computing
infrastructure to contractors and service providers. People within the
organization do not have the knowledge and skills to lead or interpret the
technological aspects of an information security risk evaluation

Scarce Resources
• Consider a large organization that has implemented many process
improvement initiatives using a quality assurance department for
oversight and guidance. The OCTAVE Method is probably a good fit for
that organization. Personnel in the quality assurance department can
become core analysis team members and lead the evaluation in the
organization.
• Now consider a small organization with only 40 employees. It does not
have a quality assurance department and may not be experienced in
implementing process improvement initiatives. This organization needs an
evaluation process that doesn't take too much time and still provides
sufficient information for the organization to characterize its risks.

OCTAVE for Smaller Organizations
• A version of OCTAVE tailored for the typical small organization will have
the following features:
– It will not require a series of knowledge elicitation workshops, because the analysis team
has sufficient insight into the organization's operational environment
– It will enable people without an information technology background to record their
requirements for a technology vulnerability evaluation, which can then be
communicated to the organization's contractors or service providers
– It will be designed for efficient data collection, enabling the analysis team to characterize
risks in a timely manner

Four Processes

PROCESS-1

PROCESS-2

PROCESS-4

PROCESS-4

• Identify
organizational
Information

• Build asset
based threat
profile

• Identify
infrastructure
vulnerabilities

• Develop
protection
strategy and
mitigation
plans

Should you use OCTAVE-S?
•

The following set of questions should be used to help determine the applicability of OCTAVES to your organization
–

Is your organization small? Does it have a flat or simple hierarchical structure?

–

Can you find a group of three to five people for the analysis team who have a broad and deep understanding
of the company and also possess most of the following skills?
•
•
•
•
•

problem-solving ability
analytical ability
ability to work in a team
at least one member with leadership skills
ability to spend a few days working on this method

–

Do you outsource all or most of your information technology functions?

–

Do you have a relatively simple information technology infrastructure that is well understood by at least one
individual in your organization.

–

Do you have limited familiarity with vulnerability evaluation tools within the context of information-related
assets or are you unable to obtain the use of this expertise from current service provider to interpret results?

• If you can answer YES to all these questions, OCTAVE-S should work for
you
• A majority of YES answers imply that it will probably work for you, but
caution is advised
• While OCTAVE-S may still be useful outside of these boundaries, the
results cannot be guaranteed

Words of Caution
• Some people might consider using OCTAVE-S within individual projects,
lines of business, or departments, subsequently integrating the results to
get the organization-wide perspective.
• Theoretically, using OCTAVE-S in this manner could work; however, there is
no data/information to support this theory nor any guidance about what
the “integration” process might require.
• So this approach is always discouraged.

